Start rewriting the reactive documentation (#17675)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/quarkus-reactive-architecture.adoc

> ////

Reviewer: The contents of this I pressume are the same as the doc you wrote and I had reviewed a week or two ago?

Author: yes

This guide is maintained in the main Quarkus repository
and pull requests should be submitted there:
https://github.com/quarkusio/quarkus/tree/main/docs/src/main/asciidoc
////
= Quarkus Reactive Architecture

include::./attributes.adoc[]

Quarkus is reactive.

> It's even more than this; Quarkus unifies reactive and imperative.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It's even more than this: Quarkus unifies reactive and imperative programming.
```

> You don't need to choose; you can implement reactive components and imperative components and combine them inside the **same** application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You don't even have to choose: you can implement reactive components and imperative components then combine them inside the very **same** application.
```

Author: Fixed.

The _Reactive_ word is overloaded and associated with many concepts such as back-pressure, monads, or event-driven architecture.
So, let's clarify what we mean by _Reactive_.

_Reactive_ is a set of principles and guidelines to build responsive distributed systems and applications.
The https://www.reactivemanifesto.org/[Reactive Manifesto] characterizes _Reactive Systems_ as distributed systems having four characteristics:

1. Responsive - they must respond in a timely fashion
2. Elastic - they adapt themselves to the fluctuating load
3. Resilient - they handle failures gracefully
4. Asynchronous message passing - the component of a reactive system interact using messages

image::reactive-systems.png[alt=Reactive Systems Pillars]

In addition to this, the https://principles.reactive.foundation/[Reactive Principles white paper] lists a set of rules and patterns to help the construction of reactive systems.

== Reactive Systems and Quarkus

Reactive System is an architectural style that can be summarized by: distributed systems done right.
Relying on asynchronous message passing helps enforce the loose coupling (both in terms of space and time) between the different components.

> You send messages to virtual destinations.The receiver can be anywhere or can even not be when the message is sent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You send messages to virtual destinations. The receiver can be anywhere or can even not be when the message is sent.
```

The elasticity pillar allows scaling up and down individual components according to the load.
Elasticity also provides redundancy, which helps with the resilience pillar.
Failures are inevitable.
Components forming a reactive system must handle them gracefully, avoid cascading failures, and self-adapt themselves.

> A responsive system can continue to handle the request while facing failures and under fluctuating load.Quarkus has been tailored for that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A responsive system can continue to handle the request while facing failures and under fluctuating load.
Quarkus has been tailored for that.
```

It provides features that will help you design, implement and operate reactive systems.

== Reactive Applications

Quarkus is not only going to help you build reactive systems.
It's also going to make sure that each constituent enforces the reactive principles and is highly efficient.

> Efficiency is essential, especially in the Cloud or in containerized environments.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Efficiency is essential, especially in the Cloud and in containerized environments.
```

Resources, such as CPU and memory, are shared among multiple applications.

> Greedy applications, consuming lots of memory, are inefficient and penalize sibling applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Greedy applications that consume lots of memory are inefficient and put penalties on sibling applications.
```

For this reason, Quarkus uses non-blocking I/O, which allows a low number of OS threads to manage many concurrent I/Os.
As a result, Quarkus applications allow for higher concurrency, use less memory, and improve the deployment density.

== How does Quarkus enable Reactive?

Under the hood, Quarkus has a reactive engine.
This engine, powered by Eclipse Vert.x and Netty, handles the non-blocking I/O interactions.

image::quarkus-reactive-core.png[Quarkus Reactive Core]

Quarkus extensions and the application code can use this engine to orchestrate I/O interactions, interact with databases, send and receive messages, and so on.

== Reactive execution model

While using non-blocking I/O has tremendous benefits, it does not come for free.
Indeed, it introduces a new execution model quite different from the one used by classical frameworks.

Traditional applications use blocking I/O and an imperative (sequential) execution model.
So, in an application exposing an HTTP endpoint, each HTTP request is associated with a thread.
In general, that thread is going to process the whole request and the thread is tied up serving only that request for the duration of that request.

> When the processing requires interacting with a remote service, it uses blocking I/O. The thread is blocked, waiting for the result of the I/O. While that model is simple to develop with, as everything is sequential, it has a drawback.To handle concurrent requests, you need multiple threads.So, you need to introduce a worker thread pool.The size of this pool constrains the concurrency of the application.In addition, each thread has a cost in terms of memory and CPU.Large thread pools result in greedy applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the processing requires interacting with a remote service, it uses blocking I/O.
The thread is blocked, waiting for the result of the I/O.
While that model is simple to develop with (as everything is sequential), it has a few drawbacks.
To handle concurrent requests, you need multiple threads, so, you need to introduce a worker thread pool.
The size of this pool constrains the concurrency of the application.
In addition, each thread has a cost in terms of memory and CPU.
Large thread pools result in greedy applications.
```

image::blocking-threads.png[alt=Imperative Execution Model and Worker Threads]

As we have seen above, non-blocking I/O avoids that problem.
A few threads can handle many concurrent I/O.
If we go back to the HTTP endpoint example, the request processing is executed on one of these I/O threads.
Because there are only a few of them, you need to use them wisely.
When the request processing needs to call a remote service, you can't block the thread anymore.
You schedule the I/O and pass a continuation, i.e., the code to execute once the I/O completes.

image::reactive-thread.png[alt=Reactive Execution Model and I/O Threads]

This model is much more efficient, but we need a way to write code to express these continuations.

== Reactive Programming Models

> The Quarkus architecture, based on non-blocking I/O and message passing, allows multiple supporting reactive development models all different in how they express continuations.The two principal ways to write reactive code with Quarkus are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Quarkus architecture, based on non-blocking I/O and message passing, allows multiple supporting reactive development models that are all different in how they express continuations.
The two main ways to write reactive code with Quarkus are:
```

> * Reactive Programming with https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny[Mutiny]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Reactive Programming with https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny[Mutiny], and
```

* Coroutines with Kotlin

> First, https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny[Mutiny] is an intuitive, event-driven reactive programming library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, https://smallrye.io/smallrye-mutiny[Mutiny] is an intuitive, event-driven reactive programming library.
```

> With Mutiny, you write event-driven code.Your code is a pipeline receiving events and processing them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With Mutiny, you write event-driven code.
Your code is a pipeline receiving events and processing them.
```

Each stage in your pipeline can be seen as a continuation, as Mutiny invokes them when the upstream part of the pipeline emits an event.

The Mutiny API has been tailored to improve the readability and maintenance of the codebase.
Mutiny provides everything you need to orchestrate asynchronous actions, including concurrent execution.
It also offers a large set of operators to manipulate individual events and streams of events.

> Find more info about Mutiny and its usage in Quarkus on xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny support documentation].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

[TIP]
Find more info about Mutiny and its usage in Quarkus on xref:mutiny-primer.adoc[Mutiny support documentation].
```

Co-routines are a way to write asynchronous code sequentially.
It suspends the execution of the code during I/O and registers the rest of the code as the continuation.

> Kotlin's coroutines are great when developing in Kotlin and only need to express sequential compositions (chain of co-dependent asynchronous tasks).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kotlin coroutines are great when developing in Kotlin and only need to express sequential compositions (chain of co-dependent asynchronous tasks).
```

* Reactive PostgreSQL client: An asynchronous and non-blocking client interacting with a PostgreSQL database, allowing high concurrency.
* Reactive MySQL client: An asynchronous and non-blocking client interacting with a MySQL database
* The MongoDB extension: exposes an imperative and reactive (Mutiny) APIs to interact with MongoDB.Mongo with Panache offers active record support for both the imperative and reactive APIs.
* The Cassandra extension: exposes an imperative and reactive (Mutiny) APIs to interact with Cassandra
* The Redis extension: exposes an imperative and reactive (Mutiny) APIs to store and retrieve data from a Redis key-value store.

=== Event-Driven Architecture

* Reactive Messaging: allows implementing event-driven applications using reactive and imperative code.
* Kafka Connector for Reactive Messaging: allows implementing applications consuming and writing Kafka records
* AMQP 1.0 Connector for Reactive Message: allows implementing applications sending and receiving AMQP messages.

=== Network Protocols and Utilities

* gRPC: implement and consume gRPC services.Offer reactive and imperative programming interfaces.

> * GraphQL: implement and query (client) data store using GraphQL.Offers Mutiny APIs and subscriptions as event streams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* GraphQL: implement and query (client) data store using GraphQL. Offers Mutiny APIs and subscriptions as event streams.
```

* Fault Tolerance: provide retry, fallback, circuit breakers abilities to your application.It can be used with Mutiny types.

[#engine]
=== Engine

* Vert.x : the underlying reactive engine of Quarkus.

> The extension allows accessing to the managed Vert.x instance, as well as it’s Mutiny variant (expose the Vert.x API using Mutiny types)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The extension allows accessing to the managed Vert.x instance, as well as its Mutiny variant (exposing the Vert.x API using Mutiny types)
```
